LRA extension blog post (#1105)
quarkusio/quarkusio.github.io: _posts/2021-08-23-using-lra.adoc

---
layout: post

> title: An Extension for Long Running Activities

Author: Is activity not already a well understood term? Activity and Action are often used interchangeably in computing and if using them that way does not hinder the users understanding of LRA then I do not see any downside to using the words interchangeably  (in fact it encourages a more expansive view of what the specification is providing to business application developers since Activity probably encompasses the definition of Action).

> title: An Extension for Long Running Activities

Reviewer: Within the LRA we use the most the term `Action`. I understand it can be used interchangeably. My point was that would be good to be consistent to naming used in LRA spec.
From what you say I understand you prefer the term `Activity` here. That's fine with me.

date: 2021-08-23
tags: extensions
synopsis: How to use the narayana LRA extension to create reliable long running activities.
author: mmusgrov
---

== Introduction

The Quarkus LRA extension is useful for building JAX-RS services that wish to definitively agree when an interaction has finished, with either a successful outcome or an unsuccessful one.
In the successful case, all participants can clean up in the knowledge that all other services will do so as well. Conversely, in the unsuccessful case, participants know that each other will compensate for any actions performed during the interaction. This feature means that participating services can reach atomic outcomes.

We call the interaction an LRA, short for Long Running Action. An LRA has specific properties and guarantees that aid the construction of reliable service interactions. Each action is assigned a unique identifier (referred to as the LRA context) so that it can be distinguished from other LRAs.

> Services start an LRA by marking a JAX-RS method with an https://download.eclipse.org/microprofile/microprofile-lra-1.0/apidocs/org/eclipse/microprofile/lra/annotation/ws/rs/LRA.html[@LRA annotation]. When such a method is invoked the system will start the action and make its identifier available as a JAX-RS header called "Long Running Action". If the body of the method performs any JAX-RS invocations the header is automatically added to outgoing requests. In this way the target services can join in with the interaction (if they are also annotated with the `@LRA` annotation).

Author: It would indeed, agreed.

IMPORTANT: The extension provides an implementation of the https://download.eclipse.org/microprofile/microprofile-lra-1.0-M1/microprofile-lra-spec.html[MicroProfile LRA specification] and its associated
 https://download.eclipse.org/microprofile/microprofile-lra-1.0/apidocs/index.html?org/eclipse/microprofile/lra/annotation/ws/rs/LRA.html[annotations].

== LRA coordinators

The `narayana-lra-extension` requires the presence of a running coordinator in the environment. Coordinators can be obtained from `https://hub.docker.com/r/jbosstm/lra-coordinator`
or you can build your own coordinator using a maven pom that includes the appropriate dependencies. For the purpose of this blog we'll show how to create from scratch using the `quarkus-maven-plugin`.
There is some extra information about configuring the coordinator in one of the https://jbossts.blogspot.com/2021/07/narayana-lra-update.html[narayana blogs].

Since the coordinator is just a JAX-RS resource we can build one using quarkus, adding the `resteasy-jackson` and `rest-client` extensions:

[source,bash]
----

> $ mvn io.quarkus:quarkus-maven-plugin:2.2.0.Final:create \

Reviewer 2: Please make it 2.2.1.Final, we won't officially announce 2.2.0.Final due to a bug in dev mode on Windows.

>       -DprojectGroupId=org.acme \

Author: Most quickstarts use `org.acme` and most user applications will want to use their own group ids.

>       -DprojectGroupId=org.acme \

Reviewer: +1

      -DprojectArtifactId=narayana-lra-coordinator \
      -Dextensions="resteasy-jackson,rest-client"
$ cd narayana-lra-coordinator/

> $ rm -rf src

Author: Will do.

----

Update the pom.xml file to add a dependency on the narayana coordinator implementation:

[source,xml]
----
    <dependency>
      <groupId>org.jboss.narayana.rts</groupId>
      <artifactId>lra-coordinator-jar</artifactId>
      <version>5.12.0.Final</version>
    </dependency>
----

Now build it and run it in the background:

[source,bash]
----
$ ./mvnw clean package
$ java -Dquarkus.http.port=50000 -jar target/quarkus-app/quarkus-run.jar &
----

Here we are running the coordinator on the default port used by the `narayana-lra` quarkus extension, namely `50000`.
You can verify that the coordinator is running okay by listing the current LRAs:

[source,bash]
----
$ curl http://localhost:50000/lra-coordinator
[]
----

This snippet shows the request returning an empty json array.

We shall leave the coordinator running while we develop and test services that use LRAs.
Towards the end of article we will show how to embed coordinators with services
(NOTE: you cannot use this approach to run coordinators in native mode, a future extension will be provided to support this requirement).

> == Non native mode

Author: I was wanting to draw out the distinction (between native and JVM) but I guess I can reword it if you think it's confusing.

> == Non native mode

Reviewer: I was just thinking that the Quarkus usually use the term "JVM mode". My point was to be consistent in the usual naming around Quarkus. I do understand both. If the current term shows better the point it can be used as it is.

> == Non native mode

Author: I have gone with your suggestion.

To build a JAX-RS application with LRA support add the dependency `io.quarkus:quarkus-narayana-lra` to your application's pom. This will add JAX-RS support and make the LRA annotations available when developing your services, it also register a JAX-RS filter that automatically manages the participation of your services in LRAs.

> The guarantees (of eventual consistency) required by the https://download.eclipse.org/microprofile/microprofile-lra-1.0-M1/microprofile-lra-spec.html[LRA specification] rely on the presence of a JAX-RS application that coordinates the services participating in the LRA. This component must be present when starting the interaction, when joining the interaction and when ending the interaction. If the coordinator becomes unavailable it should be restarted. Similarly, services participating in the LRA must be available during the end phase, the system will keep retrying each service until it indicates that it is finished with the LRA, and once a service has indicated successful compensation (or completion) it no longer takes part in the interaction (although it can register for a reliable notification that all services have finished compensating or completing). Although there can be many coordinators, at the time of writing, only one can manage a particular LRA.

Author: The system is the infrastructure and set up that implements the LRA specification so I'm happy with the term system.

> The guarantees (of eventual consistency) required by the https://download.eclipse.org/microprofile/microprofile-lra-1.0-M1/microprofile-lra-spec.html[LRA specification] rely on the presence of a JAX-RS application that coordinates the services participating in the LRA. This component must be present when starting the interaction, when joining the interaction and when ending the interaction. If the coordinator becomes unavailable it should be restarted. Similarly, services participating in the LRA must be available during the end phase, the system will keep retrying each service until it indicates that it is finished with the LRA, and once a service has indicated successful compensation (or completion) it no longer takes part in the interaction (although it can register for a reliable notification that all services have finished compensating or completing). Although there can be many coordinators, at the time of writing, only one can manage a particular LRA.

Reviewer: Ok.

=== Step 1: Create the application:

[source,bash]
----
$ ./mvnw io.quarkus:quarkus-maven-plugin:2.2.0.Final:create \
      -DprojectGroupId=org.acme \
      -DprojectArtifactId=narayana-lra-quickstart \
      -Dextensions="narayana-lra"
$ cd lra-quickstart
----

If the coordinator is running on a port different from the default then you will need to update the application config file (`src/main/resources/application.properties`) and specify its location:

[source,bash]
----

> $ quarkus.lra.coordinator-url=http://localhost:<port>/lra-coordinator

Author: The next lines already indicate that the reader should rebuild the app, quote:

```
Verify that the generated application still works after these changes:

[source,bash]
----
$ ./mvnw clean package
----
```

and the reference to updating the config is just a *note* to say that if your coordinator is not on the default port then the developer should specify where he is running coordinators; Quarkus config is preferable to java system properties when the developer knows up front what values to use.

> $ quarkus.lra.coordinator-url=http://localhost:<port>/lra-coordinator

Reviewer: Ok.

----

Verify that the generated application still works after these changes:

[source,bash]
----
$ ./mvnw clean package
----

=== Step 2: Add LRA support

Now update the generated application so that the hello method will execute in the context of a Long Running Action:

> Open the file `src/main/java/org/acme/GreetingResource.java` in an editor and annotate the hello method with an @LRA annotation (also inject the LRA context into the method using the JAX-RS `HeaderParam` annotation). In addition, add two callback methods which will be called when the LRA is closed or cancelled.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Open the file `src/main/java/org/acme/GreetingResource.java` in an editor and annotate the hello method with an `@LRA` annotation (also inject the LRA context into the method using the `@javax.ws.rs.HeaderParam` annotation). In addition, add two callback methods which will be called when the LRA is closed or cancelled.
```

Author: ok

=== Step 3: Extending the LRA across two service methods

In this step we will start an LRA but not end it when the method finishes by using https://download.eclipse.org/microprofile/microprofile-lra-1.0/apidocs/org/eclipse/microprofile/lra/annotation/ws/rs/LRA.html#end--[the end element of the LRA annotation].

Define a second business method to do this:

[source,java]
----
    @GET
    @Path("/start")
    @LRA(end = false) // Step 3a: The method should run within an LRA
    @Produces(MediaType.TEXT_PLAIN)
    public String start(@HeaderParam(LRA_HTTP_CONTEXT_HEADER) URI lraId) {
        System.out.printf("hello with context %s%n", lraId);
        return lraId.toASCIIString();
    }
----

The only difference from the hello method is the `@Path` and `@LRA` annotations and that it returns the LRA id
back to the caller. We will need this to set the header when we send a request to the hello method to finish
the LRA (note that this header is also available in one of the JAX-RS response headers).

Rebuild the application (`./mvnw package -DskipTests`) and start it running in the background:

[source,bash]
----
$ java -jar target/quarkus-app/quarkus-run.jar &
[1] 2495275
----

> Start an LRA using curl to send a request the new method we have just added:

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Start an LRA using `curl` to send a request the new method we have just added:
```

Author: ok

    }
----

Because the end method is annotated with `@LRA(value = LRA.Type.MANDATORY)`, the context header must be present otherwise the method will return an error response code:

[source,bash]
----
$ ./mvnw clean package -DskipTests
$ java -Dquarkus.http.port=8081 -jar target/quarkus-app/quarkus-run.jar &
[1] 300189
$ LRA_URL=$(curl http://localhost:8081/hello/start)
$ curl -v http://localhost:8081/hello/end
...
HTTP/1.1 412 Precondition Failed
...
----

whereas providing the LRA context header will work:

[source,bash]
----
$ curl --header "Long-Running-Action: $LRA_URL" -I http://localhost:8081/hello/end
HTTP/1.1 200 OK
Content-Type: application/octet-stream
connection: keep-alive
$ kill 300189
----

Other https://download.eclipse.org/microprofile/microprofile-lra-1.0/apidocs/org/eclipse/microprofile/lra/annotation/ws/rs/LRA.Type.html[LRA.Type element values] may be useful, depending upon what your application is trying to achieve. For those readers familiar with JTA it is worth remarking that it was loosely modelled on the https://docs.oracle.com/javaee/7/api/javax/transaction/Transactional.TxType.html[Java Transactional TxType annotation].

== Native mode

> NOTE: in native mode only external coordinators (i.e. not embedded with the application) are supported (we will provide a coordinator extension in a later release to address this deficiency).

Reviewer: The text above contains similar remark
(`(NOTE: you cannot use this approach to run coordinators in native mode, a future extension will be provided to support this requirement).`)
isn't this one an duplication?

Author: The note concerns running coordinators in native mode and it is important to include it in the native mode section and to also  prefix it with an asciidoc `NOTE:`. Therefore if I remove the initial reference, in the section on building coordinators, then the user may assume that he can produce native coordinators, and only if he reads the later section will he realise that his initial assumption was incorrect. Furthermore, if the user came to the section via a google search then he would potentially miss it altogether).

Secondly, the second note is referring to embedded coordinators whereas the first note is referring to building standalone native coordinators and therefore it is subtly different from the second reference.

Reviewer: Ok, I see.

The item to note here is that the restarted service received the completion notification (`completing ...`).
The result of the request to run a recovery cycle is a json array of recovering LRAs (in this example the list is empty because the last LRA has now finished as indicated by the empty json array `[]`).

Clean up by stopping the two services (`kill 2434936 2434984`).

== Appendix 1

=== Embedded Coordinators

Since a coordinator is just a JAX-RS application they can be embedded with JAX-RS services quite easily, just add the LRA coordinator dependency to your pom.xml file:

[source,xml]
----
    <dependency>
      <groupId>org.jboss.narayana.rts</groupId>
      <artifactId>lra-coordinator-jar</artifactId>
      <version>5.12.0.Final</version>
    </dependency>
----

and since, by default, quarkus only allows one application per deployment you will need to add the the following property to the application config file (`src/main/resources/application.properties`):

[source,xml]
----
quarkus.resteasy.ignore-application-classes=true 
----

The same caveats as described in the <<_lra-coordinators,the section on coordinators>> still apply:

- no support for native executables.

> - each instance requires dedicated storage for its transaction logs (since sharing transaction stores is not supported).

Reviewer: Do we consider starting two coordinators in the same app or a participant and coordinator.
If the later then the participant does not require to work with the transaction log storage.  And maybe the second caveat is not needed to be mentioned?

Author: Two coordinators in one app does not make much sense (and I cannot conceive of a use case).

But a coordinator embedded with a participant does make sense and the associated storage does need to be managed: the fact that a participant is running in the same JVM as the coordinator makes no difference to the fact that the storage needs to be dedicated for use by only that coordinator.

Reviewer: I see, my point was that the participant does not need any storage that would be related to Narayana. The object store is used only by coordinator. The participant does not touch it. Participant will usually have own "unrelated" storage.

The note is not problematic just it seemed to me to hint that the participant could be somehow related to object store which should not be so.

Author: Your point is noted but embedding a coordinator with the participant implies that the associated storage for the transaction logs cannot be shared. I reworded the sentence to make it clear:

`dedicated storage for its transaction logs` -> `dedicated storage for the coordinators' transaction logs`
